=== 3.1 Create a new sketch or drawing 

To start a sketch, use the `new Sketcher` command. Note the keyword `new` that is required to create a new object of the type `Sketcher`.  

[source, javascript]
----
let sketch = new Sketcher("XZ",-5)
".sketchCommands"        (see below)
.close()                    // ends the sketch with line to starting point
.done()                     // ends the sketch without closing
.closeWithMirror()          // closes the sketch with mirror on axis from start to end

----

The definition of a sketch refers to a plane in 3D space where the sketch is drawn. Most often this will be either the "XY" plane (top view), the "XZ" plane (front view) or the "XY" plane (side view). It is also possible to define an offset to these planes, as was done in the code sample above.  

An alternative and often preferred method to create a sketch is to use the function `draw()` to create a drawing. 
A drawing can be understood as an adapted version of a sketch. A sketch starts with identifying the sketching plane first and then defining a wire. As the plane is defined up front, the sketch is in fact a 3D shape from its origin. In contrast a drawing is considered a pure 2D shape that can be placed on a plane after its creation. Compared to a sketch a drawing has the following advantages: 

* drawings can be translated, rotated (in 2D space) and scaled;
* drawings can be used in 2D boolean operations;
* drawings can be exported directly in 2D formats;
* drawings can be placed on other shapes, not only planes

The drawing can be defined with the `draw()` function. As this function already includes the creation of a new object the `new` keyword is not needed. The starting point of the drawing can be defined by adding a 2D point as a parameter to the `draw()`, for example `draw([5,5])`.   

[source, javascript]
----
const shape1 = draw()
    .lineTo([20,0])
    .line(0,5)
    .hLine(10)
    .vLine(5)
    .polarLineTo([22,45])
    .polarLine(10,150)
    .halfEllipse(-10, -15, 5)
    .smoothSpline(2, -5)
    .close() 
----    

After its creating, a drawing has to be placed on a plane, using the method `.sketchOnPlane`. Through this method, a drawing can also be translated and rotated in 3D space. You can achieve this by translating and pivoting the plane on which the drawing is placed. For example, using the following code: 

[source, javascript]
----
  const bottomPlane = makePlane().pivot(20, "Y").translateZ(80);
  const bottomCircle = drawCircle(9).sketchOnPlane(bottomPlane);
----

first a Plane is defined, which is first pivoted by 20 degrees along the Y-axis and then translated up 80 mm on the Z-axis. Note that you can not translate or rotate the sketch after it is placed on a plane. The full set of commands to create and position planes is : 

[cols="1,3",stripes=even]
|===
m| .sketchOnPlane(plane,offset)   | place the drawing on a given plane 
m| makePlane()                    | create a basic plane, default is on the XY plane
m| .pivot(degrees, axis)          | rotate the plane x degrees around the given axis
m| .translate                     | translate the plane 
m| .translateZ                    | translate the plane along the Z-axis
m| .translateY                    | translate the plane along the Y-axis
m| .translateX                    | translate the plane along the X-axis
|===

A standard plane is identified "XY", "XZ", "YZ", but using the function `makePlane()` you can also define a new plane with its own name. 

There are a number of ".methods" to define a sketch that can be used either on a `new Sketcher()` object or on a `draw()` object. These will be explained in the following paragraphs. 


=== 3.2 Create straight lines

image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/lines.png[]

Straight lines can be sketched using the line functions. Be aware that points are generally defined as a tuple or array, i.e. enclosed in square brackets. This array either contains the absolute distance in the x and y direction from the origin, or the distance and angle in case of polar coordinates. Relative distances to the x- and y-axis are defined as two separate values dx and dy. 

[cols="1,3",stripes=even]
|===
m| .movePointerTo([x,y])          | move pointer without drawing, can only be used at start
m| .lineTo([x,y])                 | line to absolute coordinates
m| .line(dx,dy)                   | line to relative coordinates
m| .vLineTo(y)                    | vertical line to absolute y
m| .vLine(dy)                     | vertical line to relative y
m| .hLineTo(x)                    | horizontal line to absolute x
m| .hLine(dx)                     | horizontal line to relative x
m| .polarLineTo([radius,theta])   | line to absolute polar coordinates. Note that the absolute polar coordinates are defined as an vector [radius,theta]
m| .polarLine(distance,angle)     | line to relative polar coordinates
m| .tangentLine(distance)         | tangent extension over distance
|===

=== 3.3 Create arcs and ellipses
image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/arcs.png[]

The following commands are available to create circular and elliptical arcs in your sketch. Just as with lines be aware that points are generally defined as a tuple or array, i.e. enclosed in square brackets. Relative distances to the x- and y-axis are defined as two separate values dx and dy. 
The elliptic curves can be defined in more detail with three extra parameters. If the values are omitted the default values are used. 

[cols="1,3",stripes=even]
|===
m| .threePointsArcTo(point_end,point_mid)   | arc from current to end via mid, absolute coordinates
m| .threePointsArc(dx,dy,dx_via,dy_via)     | arc from current to end via mid, relative coordinates
m| .sagittaArcTo(point_end,sagitta)         | arc from current to end with sag , absolute coordinates
m| .sagittaArc(dx,dy,sagitta)               | arc from current to end with sag, relative coordinates
m| .vSagittaArc(dy,sagitta)                 | vertical line to endpoint with sag, relative y
m| .hSagittaArc(dx,sagitta)                 | horizontal line to endpoint with sag, relative x
m| .tangentArcTo([x,y])                     | arc tangent to current line to end, absolute coordinates
m| .tangentArc(dx,dy)                       | arc tangent to current line to end, relative coordinates
m| .ellipseTo([x,y],r_hor,r_vert)           | ellipse from current to end, absolute coordinates, radii to hor and vert
m| .ellipse(dx,dy,r_hor,r_vert)             | ellipse from current to end, relative coordinates, radii to hor and vert
m| .ellipse(dx,dy,r_h,r_v,a_start,a_end,true)| extra parameters ellipse: startangle, endangle, counterclockwise? 
m| .ellipse(dx,dy,r_h,r_v,deg rotation, axis[], counter? | extra parameters ellipse, rotation around axis defined as [x,y,z] array 
m| .halfEllipseTo([x,y],r_min)              | half ellipse with r_min as sag, absolute coordinates    
m| .halfEllipse(dx,dy,r_min)                | half ellipse with r_min as sag, relative coordinates
|===

These functions create only partial arcs. To create a circle you need to define two arcs as the start and endpoint may not be identical.The following code shows how to draft a circle. Note that the same can be achieved with the function `sketchCircle` or `drawCircle` (see next sections). 

[source, javascript]
----
const {draw, Sketcher} = replicad

function main()
{
    let circle = new Sketcher("XY")
    .halfEllipseTo([0,20],10)   // first half of circle, only one radius needed, long axis is defined by coordinates
    .ellipseTo([0,0],10,10)     // second half, if r_min and r_max are equal this defines a circle
    .close()
    .extrude(5)

    return circle
}
----

The following code shows some examples of the methods to sketch arcs. Some general remarks on the creation of arcs: 

* The arcs are always created in a clockwise direction. Only the `ellipse` method supports the counter-clockwise direction, but this results in a non-logic behaviour related to the other parameters that are passed to the function. For example, if you draw an arc 270 degrees clockwise, the result is a three quarter circle, if you draw the arc using the same parameters but anti-clockwise, the result is only a quarter of a circle. 

* The definition of so-called sagitta arcs is equally difficult. Again it helps to start defining the sketch in a clockwise direction. When moving in a clockwise direction, the bulge or sag of the arc is to the left of the straight line between the two outer points of the arc when the value is positive. If you want the bulge to be on the other side, you have to define a negative value for this parameter. As shown in the small icon above, the dimension of the sag defines the distance between the straight line from the startpoint to the endpoint and the outside of the arc. So to represent a circle

* A tangent arc is only tangent to the segment that directly precedes the arc. It will not be tangent to the line following the arc. If you want to create a fillet or rounding that is tangent to two segments, use the method `.customCorner(radius)` that is explained in the next section.

---
._Examples of arcs, created with code below_ 
image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/arc-examples.png[]
---


[source, javascript]
----
const {draw, Sketcher} = replicad

function main()
{
    let r  = 10  // radius of arcs
    let xr = 10 // x-coordinate
    let yr = 10 // y-coordinate

    let circle = new Sketcher("XY")
    .ellipseTo([xr,yr],r,r)
    .close()
    .extrude(3)

    let circle2 = new Sketcher("XY")
    .movePointerTo([xr,yr])
    .ellipseTo([0,0],r,r)
    .close()
    .extrude(2)
    .translate([10,0,0])

    let circle3 = new Sketcher("XY")
    .ellipseTo([0,2*yr],r,r)
    .ellipseTo([xr,yr],r,r)
    .lineTo([0,yr])
    .close()
    .extrude(5)
    .translate(-10,0,0)

    let circle4 = new Sketcher("XY")
    .ellipse(xr,yr,r,r,270,[0,0,1],false)
    .lineTo([0,r])
    .close()
    .extrude(1)
    .translate(0,-30,0)

    let arc1 = draw()
    .sagittaArc(-xr,yr,r)
    .sagittaArc(xr,yr,-(10-Math.sqrt((r/2*r/2)+(r/2*r/2))))
    .close()
    .sketchOnPlane("XY")
    arc1 = arc1.extrude(3).translate([40,0,0])

    return [circle,circle2,circle3,circle4,arc1]
}
----


=== 3.4 Fillets and chamfers in 2D  
Creating a rounded edge or fillet in sharp corners of your sketch can be achieved by calculating the parameters for the arc methods described in the previous paragraphs but can also be achieved with a specialized method called `customCorner(radius)`. This method uses the radius of the rounding as an argument and is applied to the corner defined by the last coordinate of the previous drawing command. The method should therefore be placed between the two methods used to define the corner. The following code snippet shows an example how to create a rounded shape. Note that in this case, using a rounding radius that is exactly half the height of the shape fails. If you want to achieve a semi-circle at each end you have to use the arc methods described in the previous section. 

As the method has to be placed in between two methods that describe a sharp corner, the method can not be used as the last statement before closing or ending the sketch. In the example below this is solved to shift the startpoint for the definition of the rectangle from the first corner in the bottom left to somewhere along the first line (drawing counterclockwise). Another point worth noting is that when rounding sharp edges, as is done in the example below, the result might be different from what you expect. 

---
._Adding 2D fillets to a sketch_ 
image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/fillet2D.png[width=400]
---

``` javascript
const { draw } = replicad;

const main = () => {
  // just lines
  const s1 = 
  draw([20,0])
    .hLine(30)
    .customCorner(5.45)
    .vLine(11)
    .customCorner(5.45)
    .hLine(-50)
    .customCorner(3)
    .line(5,-11)
    .customCorner(5)
    .close();

return [
    { shape: s1, color: "blue", name: "Straight lines" }
]
} 
```

The method `.customCorner(radius)` also supports creating chamfers. To achieve this you have to add a second argument to the method: `customCorner(radius, "chamfer")`. The default value of this argument is `"fillet"`, so it does not have to be added explicitly. The dimension of the chamfer describes the length of the straight line perpendicular to the lines that define the corner. In case of sharp corner it is difficult to predict where this corner will land and what will be the overall dimension of the resulting shape. 

---
._Adding 2D chamfers to a sketch_ 
image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/chamfer2d.png[width=400]
---

``` javascript
const { draw } = replicad;

const main = () => {
  // just lines
  const s1 = 
  draw([20,0])
    .hLine(30)
    .customCorner(5, "chamfer")
    .vLine(11)
    .customCorner(5.45)
    .hLine(-50)
    .customCorner(3,"chamfer")
    .line(5,-11)
    .customCorner(5, "chamfer")
    .close();

return [
    { shape: s1, color: "blue", name: "Straight lines" }
]
} 

```



=== 3.5 Free form curves

image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/curves.png[width=650]

Free form curves can be created with the methods listed below. 

[cols="1,3",stripes=even]
|===
m| .bezierCurveTo([x,y],points[])                       | Bezier curve to end along points[]
m| .quadraticBezierCurveTo([x,y],[x_ctrl,y_ctrl])       | Quadratic bezier curve to end with control point
m| .cubicBezierCurveTo([x,y],p_ctrl_start,p_ctrl_end)   | Cubic bezier curve with begin and end control points 
m| .smoothSplineTo([x,y],splineconfig)                  | smooth spline to end, absolute coordinates 
m| .smoothSpline(dx,dy,splineconfig)                    | smooth spline to end, absolute coordinates 
m|                                                      m| splineconfig = {startTangent:angle,endTangent:angle / "symmetric"}
m| drawPointsInterpolation(array[[pt1],[pt2]..[ptn]])   | create a drawing of a curve that is an interpolation of all points in the array| 
|===

A Bezier curve is a type of curve that is defined by a set of control points. It was developed by French engineer Pierre Bezier for use in the design of Renault cars in the 1960s. The important feature of a Bezier curve is that the control points influence the shape of the curve, but the curve does not necessarily pass through these points. In case of a quadratic Bezier curve there is only one control point between the startpoint and endpoint of the curve which defines the direction of the curve at both ends. Using a cubic Bezier curve it is possible to adjust the slope of the curve at both ends. The control points may be considered as a kind of magnet, pulling the curve towards it. The further the control points are placed, the stronger the curve will deviate from a straight line between the begin and endpoints. The `.bezierCurveTo` method allows a large array of control points to define the shape of the curve, but adjusting these endpoints is difficult without being able to judge the effect of these points. 

--- 
._Illustration of different Bezier curves_
image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/bezier_curves.png[width=700]
---

The `.smoothSpline` method defines a curve that passes through each point. The shape of the curve can be adjusted using the spline configuration. An example of the application of this function is shown in <<smoothspline>>. The startTangent and endTangent define the angle of the curve at its starting and end point. The factor defines how far the curve is drawn into the direction of the tangent. The larger the factor, the longer the curve wants to proceed in the direction of the specified tangent. 

---
._Example of the application of the smoothSpline method_
[#smoothspline]
image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/smoothsplinehook.png[800]
---

It is not always necessary to use the configuration at the begin and end point of a smoothSpline. In the example in <<mouse>> the `.smoothSpline` method is used between two arcs. The `smoothSpline` adapts to the tangent of the previous line segment. Without any previous line segment it uses a tangent of 0 degrees, i.e. in the x-direction (assuming a drawing area aligned with x,y coordinates). The smoothSpline does not adjust the endTangent to the next segment, so without any specification the endTangent is 0 degrees, along the x-axis. In <<mouse>> this yields the intended result without any additional configuration. 

---
._Using the smoothSpline between two arcs without config_
[#mouse]
image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/mouse.png[]
---

The code below illustrates how a `smoothSpline` curve is either tangent to the x-axis or follows the tangent of the previous line segment. It also demonstrates that with a factor of 2.63 the resulting curve is very close to a perfect arc.  

---
._Comparison of smoothSpline curves_
image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/smoothspline.png[width=800]
---

[source, javascript]
----
const {draw} = replicad

function main()
{
let spline = draw()
.smoothSplineTo([20,0],
{startTangent:50, startFactor: 1.8, 
endTangent:-50, endFactor: 1.8}).done()

let  spline2 = draw()
.smoothSplineTo([10,5])
.smoothSplineTo([20,0]).done()

let spline3 = draw()
.lineTo([0,0.1])
.smoothSplineTo([10,5])
.smoothSplineTo([20,0.4])
.lineTo([20,0]).done()

let spline4 = draw()
.smoothSplineTo([0,10],
{startTangent:180, startFactor: 2.63, 
endTangent:0, endFactor: 2.63})
.done().translate(10.0)

let arc = draw()
.threePointsArcTo([0,10],[-5,5])
.done().translate(10,0)

return [{shape: spline, color: "red"},
{shape: spline2, color: "blue"},
{shape: spline3, color: "green"},
{shape: spline4, color: "black"},
{shape: arc, color: "purple"}]
}
----

The function `drawPointsInterpolation(array of points)` is a drawing function that draws a curve through all points listed in the array of 2D points. The code sample below shows an example how this function can be used to create the shape of an airfoil by creating an array that lists 2D points along the contour of the airfoil. Note that the curve starts and ends at the sharp trailing edge of the airfoil. The last point of the array has to be identical to the first point to create a closed curve for extrapolation. Closing the curve in another way is difficult this drawing is created with a function, not a method that can be followed by any of the other drawing methods listed above.   

[source, javascript]
----
let chord = 100 
let span  = 100
let airfoilPointsLarge = airfoilPoints.map(function([x,y]){return [x*chord,y*chord]}) 
let airfoil = drawPointsInterpolation(airfoilPointsLarge).sketchOnPlane("XZ");
let wing = airfoil.extrude(span)
----


<<<

=== 3.6 Pre-baked sketches and drawings
The methods described in the previous chapter contain the building blocks that can be used to create any sketch or drawing. To simplify the creation of standard shapes like rectangles, circles and ellipses, some standard functions are available in Replicad. The function encapsulates the process to create a sketch or drawing, so only using the function with the required parameters is sufficient to create a sketch. Note that the `draw()` functions still have to be placed on a plane before they can be used to create 3D shapes. 

image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/baked-sketch.png[width=650]

[cols="1,3",stripes=even]
|===
m| sketchRectangle(length,width)                    | create a sketch of a rectangle with length and width
m| sketchRoundedRectangle(length,width,fillet,{plane:"XY",origin:dist/[point]})  | create a sketch of a rounded rectangle 
m| sketchCircle(radius,{config})                    | create a sketch of a circle
m| sketchEllipse(xRadius,yRadius,{planeConfig})     | create a sketch of an ellipse
m| sketchPolysides(radius,numSides,sagitta?,{planeConfig})| create a sketch of a regular polygon, where the sides of the polygon are lines or arcs with a sag from the straight line. The radius is defined without the sagitta.  
m| sketchText(string,{textConfig?},{planeConfig} | create a sketch of a text. The textConfig defines the fontFamily, fontSize, startX,startY 
m| sketchFaceOffset(shape,thickness)                | create a sketch by defining an offset from an existing face in the scene
m| sketchParametricFunction(function,{planeconfig},namedParameters?,approximation?| create a sketch of a parametric function
|===

Similarly as for the sketches, some pre-baked drawings are available to speed-up the creation of standard shapes. As the draw() object also allows boolean operations the creation of more complex shapes can be achieved by combining a number of standard shapes. 

[cols="1,3",stripes=even]
|===
m| drawRoundedRectangle(length, width, radius) | Draw a rounded rectangle centered at [0,0] 
m| drawSingleCircle(radius)                 | Creates the `Drawing` of a circle as one single curve. The circle is centered on [0, 0]
m| drawCircle(radius)                       | 
m| drawSingleEllipse(majRadius,minRadius)   | Creates the `Drawing` of an ellipse as one single curve. The ellipse is centered on [0, 0], with axes aligned with the coordinates.
m| drawPolysides(radius, sidesCount,sagitta = 0) | Creates the `Drawing` of an polygon in a defined plane. The sides of the polygon can be arcs of circle with a defined sagitta. The radius defines the out radius of the polygon without sagitta. 
m| drawText("text",{ startX: 0, startY: 0, fontSize: 16, fontFamily: "default" }| Draw a 2D text. The options can be used to adjust location, fontsize and font. 
m| drawParametricFunction(function, {options}) | Draw a parametric function with variable t. With the option it is possible to adjust the number of intermediate points that are used { pointsCount : 400, start : 0, stop : 1 } and the type of approximation of the curve. 
m| drawPointsInterpolation(points2D[],{approximationConfig:})  | Draw a bSpline through the array of points 
|===


=== 3.7 Methods for drawings

In the introduction to the chapter on sketches and drawings it was explained that drawings support some additional methods compared to sketches. These methods are listed in the following table. 

[cols="1,3",stripes=even]
|===
m| .clone()                                 | create a copy of the shape 
m| .offset(r)                               | create a 2D offset with radius r, shape is rounded with radius, negative inwards
m| .mirror([center/dir],[origin],mode? )    | mode? "center" or "plane"  
m| .translate(xDist,yDist)                  | translate the shape 
m| .rotate(angle,[center])                  | rotate the shape
m| .stretch(ratio,direction,origin)         | scale the shape in a single direction
m| .cut(cuttingDrawing)                     | create a 2D boolean where the drawing listed as an argument to this method is subtracted from the drawing that this method is acting on.     
m| .intersect(drawing)                      | create a 2D intersection between two drawings   
m| .fuse(other)                             | create a 2D boolean where the drawing listed as an argument is fused to the drawing that this method is acting on
m| .sketchOnFace(face,scaleMode)            | The scale mode is "original" for global coordinates, "bounds" for following UV of the receiving face or "native" for the default UV parameters of opencascade 
m| .sketchOnPlane                           | place the drawing on a plane 
m| .toSVG(margin)                           | format the drawing as an SVG image
m| .toSVGPaths()                            | format the drawing as a list of SVG paths
m| .toSVGViewBox                            | return the SVG viewbox that corresponds to this drawing
|=== 

The boolean operations `cut`, `fuse` and `intersect` provide options to shortcut the creation of complicated drawings without the need for complex geometric calculations. 
Using boolean functions and the pre-baked drawings of a circle and rectangle, creating a shape like an axle with a keyway is very simple. Notice in de code below that a drawing needs to be placed on a plane before any other method can be applied to it. 

``` javascript
const { draw, drawCircle, drawRectangle} = replicad;

const main = () => {
let axleRadius = 11
let keySlotHeight = 6
let keySlotWidth  = 2.50  

let axleHole = drawCircle(axleRadius)
let axleHole2 = drawCircle(axleRadius).translate(3*axleRadius,0)
let keySlot  = drawRectangle(2*keySlotWidth,keySlotHeight)
.translate(-axleRadius,0)
let keySlot2  = drawRectangle(2*keySlotWidth,keySlotHeight)
.translate(-axleRadius,0).translate(3*axleRadius,0)
let axleShape = axleHole.cut(keySlot).sketchOnPlane("XZ")
let axleShape2 = axleHole2.fuse(keySlot2).sketchOnPlane("XZ",20)
let axle = axleShape.extrude(25)
let axle2 = axleShape2.extrude(25)

  return [axle,axle2];
};
```

---
._Creating an axle with a keyway using 2D boolean functions on drawings_
image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/keyway.png[]
--- 

The `.intersect()` method can be used to create shapes based on the intersection of two other shapes. An example is creating a curved slot (see image below). By intersecting a ring with a sector, only a segment of the ring remains. The rounded ends of the curved slot are then added by fusing circles at each end. 

---
._Creating a curved slot using an intersection and union of drawings_
image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/sector_intersection.png[width = 800]
--- 

The following code snippet shows the use of the 2D offset function. Offset only works on a closed curve. The curve is offset with radius r, positive values create an offset outward of the curve, negative values inward. When offsetting outward, the curve is automatically rounded with the radius r. In the code example a rounded rectangle is created by drawing a very thin rectangle, then applying an offset of 5 mm, resulting in a shape with a height of 10 mm and corners rounded with a radius of 5 mm. Then an additional shape is created with an offset of 2 mm. Finally the original shape is subtracted from the offset shape to create a thin walled shape.  

[source, javascript]
----
const {draw} = replicad

function main()
{
// frontview of receiver is just a rectangle with height 0.1 mm
let frontView = draw()
.movePointerTo([-20,7])
.hLine(40)
.vLine(0.1)
.hLine(-40)
.close()

let contourBody = frontView.offset(5) // shape is offset with r=5
let contourHolder = contourBody.offset(2) // holder is offset with r=2
// not that drawings have to placed on plane before extruding
let gpsFront = contourBody.sketchOnPlane("YZ")
let holderFront = contourHolder.sketchOnPlane("YZ")
let gpsReceiver = gpsFront.extrude(70)
let gpsHolder = holderFront.extrude(72).cut(gpsReceiver)

return [gpsReceiver,gpsHolder]
}
---- 

---
._Creating a thin walled shape with an offset_ 
image::https://github.com/raydeleu/ReplicadManual/blob/main/images/offset2D.png[width=500]
---





